Add best practice for warpSize handling (#3790)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_cpp_language_extensions.rst

Reviewer: The discussion on warpSize at line 415 refers to "hardware features" but it seems like some mention of the fact that warpSize and Wavefront size are the same would be useful here?

Author: Did some changes.

  of 32 can run on devices with a ``warpSize`` of 64, it only utilizes half of
  the compute resources.

The warpSize parameter will no longer be a compile-time constant in future
ROCm and it has never been a compile-time variable in the CUDA SDK. The
recommended approach for handling different warp sizes is to determine the warp
size on the host side and select the appropriate kernel accordingly, which shown

> in the following example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The warpSize parameter will no longer be a compile-time constant in a future release of ROCm. 
The recommended approach for handling different warp sizes is to determine the warp
size of the device from the host application and setup the kernel accordingly, as shown
in the following example.
```

Reviewer: I think some brief explanation of what the example shows would be helpful? Maybe a sentence or two on how the Warpsize affects the kernel?

Author: Updated and added description to the example code.

  
  int main() {

    int deviceId = 0;
    int warpSizeHost;
    HIP_CHECK(hipDeviceGetAttribute(&warpSizeHost, hipDeviceAttributeWarpSize, deviceId));
    std::cout << "Warp size: " << warpSizeHost << std::endl;

    constexpr int numOfBlocks = 16;
    constexpr int threadsPerBlock = 1024;
    constexpr size_t arraySize = numOfBlocks * threadsPerBlock;

    int *d_data, *d_results;
    int initValue = 1;
    std::vector<int> vectorInput(arraySize, initValue);
    std::vector<int> vectorOutput(numOfBlocks);
    // Allocate device memory
    HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc(&d_data, arraySize * sizeof(*d_data)));
    HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc(&d_results, numOfBlocks * sizeof(*d_results)));
    // Host to Device copy of the input array
    HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(d_data, vectorInput.data(), arraySize * sizeof(*d_data), hipMemcpyHostToDevice));
    
    // Select the kernel
    if(warpSizeHost == 32) {
      block_reduce<32><<<dim3(numOfBlocks), dim3(threadsPerBlock), threadsPerBlock * sizeof(*d_data)>>>(d_data, d_results, arraySize);
    } else if(warpSizeHost == 64) {
      block_reduce<64><<<dim3(numOfBlocks), dim3(threadsPerBlock), threadsPerBlock * sizeof(*d_data)>>>(d_data, d_results, arraySize);

>     } else {

Reviewer: As warpSizeHost is determined by hipDeviceAttributeWarpSize is it necessary to cover the "Unsupported warp size" here?

Author: Yes.

  of 32 can run on devices with a ``warpSize`` of 64, it only utilizes half of
  the compute resources.

The warpSize parameter will no longer be a compile-time constant in a future
release of ROCm. The recommended approach for handling different warp sizes is
to determine the warp size of the GPU on host side and setup the kernel
accordingly, as shown in the following block reduce example.

The ``block_reduce`` kernel has a template parameter for warpSize and reduction

> operation in two main phases:

Reviewer 2: The second part of the sentence seems to lack a verb for me, maybe something like "...and **performs a** reduction operation in two main phases:"?

- Shared memory reduction: Reduction is performed iteratively, halving the
  number of active threads each step until only a warp remains
  (32 or 64 threads, depending on the device).

- Warp-level reduction: Once the shared memory reduction completes, the
  remaining threads use warp-level shuffling to sum the remaining values. This
  is done efficiently with the __shfl_up intrinsic, which allows threads within
  the warp to exchange values without explicit synchronization.

The host code with the main function:

- Retrieves the warp size of the GPU (warpSizeHost) to determine the optimal
  kernel configuration.

> - Allocates device memory (`d_data`` for input, `d_results`` for block-wise

Reviewer 2: The backticks around `d_data` and `d_results` are not properly matched.

  output) and initializes the input vector to 1.

- Selects the appropriate kernel specialization based on the warp

>   size (either 32 or 64) and launch the kernel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  size (either 32 or 64) and launches the kernel.
```

- Synchronizes the device and copies the results back to the host.

- Checks that each block's sum is equal to ``threadsPerBlock``, verifying
  the reduction's correctness.

> - Free the device memory to prevent memory leaks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Frees the device memory to prevent memory leaks.
```

                  << status << ": "            \
                  << hipGetErrorString(status) \
                  << " at " << __FILE__ << ":" \
                  << __LINE__ << std::endl;    \
      }                                        \
  }

  template<uint32_t WarpSize>
  __global__ void block_reduce(int* input, int* output, size_t size){
    extern __shared__ int shared[];

    // Overindex-safe read of input
    auto read_global_safe = [&](const uint32_t i)
    {
      return i < size ? input[i] : 0;
    };

    const uint32_t tid = threadIdx.x,
                   bid = blockIdx.x,
                   gid = bid * blockDim.x + tid;

    // Read input buffer to shared
    shared[tid] = read_global_safe(gid);
    __syncthreads();

    // Shared reduction
    for (uint32_t i = blockDim.x / 2; i >= WarpSize; i /= 2)
    {
      if (tid < i)
        shared[tid] = shared[tid] + shared[tid + i];
      __syncthreads();
    }
  
    // Use local variable in warp reduction  
    int result =  shared[tid];
    __syncthreads();

    #pragma unroll
    for (uint32_t i = WarpSize/2; i != 0; i /= 2) {
      if (tid < i) {
        result = result + __shfl_up(result, i);

> 	  }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    }
```
(replacing a tab with 2 spaces)

  of 32 can run on devices with a ``warpSize`` of 64, it only utilizes half of
  the compute resources.

The warpSize parameter will no longer be a compile-time constant in a future
release of ROCm. The recommended approach for handling different warp sizes is

> to determine the warp size of the GPU on host side and setup the kernel

Reviewer 2: Should we maybe also recommend something like "...to use the non-constexpr `warpSize` variable where adequate or to determine the warp size..."? I think that is still a viable approach that can be sufficient in many cases and that we don't want to discourage. It's not like using the `warpSize` variable would cause some expensive calls to the runtime, it's just not visibly constant to the first stages of compilation.

Author: Updated. Please check.

accordingly, as shown in the following block reduce example.

The ``block_reduce`` kernel has a template parameter for warp size and performs
a reduction operation in two main phases:

- Shared memory reduction: Reduction is performed iteratively, halving the
  number of active threads each step until only a warp remains
  (32 or 64 threads, depending on the device).

- Warp-level reduction: Once the shared memory reduction completes, the
  remaining threads use warp-level shuffling to sum the remaining values. This

>   is done efficiently with the __shfl_up intrinsic, which allows threads within

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  is done efficiently with the ``__shfl_down`` intrinsic, which allows threads within
```
Code markup, and it seems like you're shuffling down, not up, in the code.

  the warp to exchange values without explicit synchronization.

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Compile-time WarpSize
       :sync: compile-time-warpsize

       .. literalinclude:: ../tools/example_codes/template_warp_size_reduction.hip
          :start-after: // [Sphinx template warp size block reduction kernel start]
          :end-before: // [Sphinx template warp size block reduction kernel end]
          :language: cpp

>     .. tab-item:: Runtime warpSize

Reviewer 2: Should we rather call those tabs "WarpSize Template Parameter" and "warpSize Variable" or something like that? As mentioned above, `warpSize` doesn't really incur runtime calls, it's just resolved a bit later in compilation.

Author: Updated. Please check.

       :sync: runtime-warpsize

       .. literalinclude:: ../tools/example_codes/warp_size_reduction.hip
          :start-after: // [Sphinx runtime warp size block reduction kernel start]
          :end-before: // [Sphinx runtime warp size block reduction kernel end]
          :language: cpp

The host code with the main function:

- Retrieves the warp size of the GPU (warpSizeHost) to determine the optimal
  kernel configuration.

- Allocates device memory (``d_data`` for input, ``d_results`` for block-wise
  output) and initializes the input vector to 1.

> - Generate the mask variables for every warp and copy to device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Generates the mask variables for every warp and copies them to the device.
```

            :language: cpp

- Selects the appropriate kernel specialization based on the warp
  size (either 32 or 64) and launches the kernel.

  .. tab-set::

      .. tab-item:: Compile-time WarpSize
         :sync: compile-time-warpsize

         .. literalinclude:: ../tools/example_codes/template_warp_size_reduction.hip
            :start-after: // [Sphinx template warp size select kernel start]
            :end-before: // [Sphinx template warp size select kernel end]
            :language: cpp

      .. tab-item:: Runtime warpSize
         :sync: runtime-warpsize

         .. literalinclude:: ../tools/example_codes/warp_size_reduction.hip
            :start-after: // [Sphinx runtime warp size select kernel start]
            :end-before: // [Sphinx runtime warp size select kernel end]
            :language: cpp

- Synchronizes the device and copies the results back to the host.

- Checks that each block's sum is equal with the expected maskbit count, 
  verifying the reduction's correctness.

- Frees the device memory to prevent memory leaks.

.. note::

  The ``warpSize`` runtime example code is also provided for comparison purposes

>   and the full example codes located in `tools folder <https://github.com/ROCm/hip/tree/docs/develop/docs/tools/example_codes>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and the full example codes are located in the `tools folder <https://github.com/ROCm/hip/tree/docs/develop/docs/tools/example_codes>`_.
```

>   The runtime variable ``warpSize`` can be used within a for loop and supports 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The variable ``warpSize`` can be used for loop bounds and supports 
```

  loop unrolling similarly to the template parameter ``WarpSize``.

> For users who still require a compile-time constant variable as a macro on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For users who still require a compile-time constant warp size as a macro on the
```

  of 32 can run on devices with a ``warpSize`` of 64, it only utilizes half of
  the compute resources.

The ``warpSize`` parameter will no longer be a compile-time constant in a future
release of ROCm, however it will be still early folded by the compiler, which
means it can be used for loop bounds and supports loop unrolling similarly to
compile-time warp size.

If the compile time warp size still required for example to select the correct

> mask type or code path compile time, the recommended approach is to determine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the compile time warp size is still required, for example to select the correct
mask type or code path at compile time, the recommended approach is to determine
```

  of range, the thread returns its own ``var``.

``__shfl_down``

>   The thread reads ``var`` from lane ``laneIdx + delta``, thereby "shuffling"

Reviewer 2: That seems like an unrelated change, is that intentional?

Author: Yes, it's intentional. I detected a problem in the description, the ``__shfl_down`` and ``__shfl_up`` description were almost the same.
